A jack zero latency post (#217)
mixxxdj/website: content/news/XXXX-XX-XX-jack-zero-latency.md

title: "Has JACK zero latency?"
authors: Daniel Schürmann
tags: 2.3, jack
date: 2021.03.18 02:42:18

> In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the JACK layer introduces. Here we can read that Jack adds zero latency: [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the JACK layer introduces. The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:
> There is **NO** extra latency caused by using JACK for audio input and output. When we say none, we mean absolutely zero.
```

> This is true on its own, because Jack uses directly the buffer provided by ALSA to mix the audio sources together. ALSA has a second buffer that is used to feed the samples into the hardware. That's all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is true on its own, because JACK uses directly the buffer provided by ALSA to mix the audio sources together. ALSA has a second buffer that is used to feed the samples into the hardware. That's all.
```
And everywhere else

> However in the case of Mixxx another buffer is used, because Mixxx has its own real time mixing stage and uses the portaudio abstraction layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However in the case of Mixxx another buffer is used, because Mixxx has its own realtime mixing stage and uses the PortAudio abstraction layer.
```

> When using the ALSA API directly Mixxx does what Jack does. It uses directly the ALSA buffer and adds this way zero latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the ALSA API directly Mixxx does what Jack does. It uses the ALSA buffer directly, which doesn't add any latency.
```

This can be confirmed by recording the own sound via a mic and measure the round trip latency:

![Screenshot of audacity showing the round trip latency]({static}/images/news/roundtriplatency.png)

The upper stream is the JACK case. The left channel is the recorded master 440 Hz sine wave and the right channel is the mic input.

> JACK is configured with a 1024 frames buffer and reports a latency of 46,4 ms for the sum of two buffers .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JACK is configured with a 1024 frames buffer and reports a latency of 46.4 ms for the sum of two buffers .
```

The roundtrip latency is 95 ms ~4 buffers = Driver + ALSA + 2 x Mixxx

> The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23,2 ms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23.2 ms
```

title: "Has JACK zero latency?"

> authors: Daniel Schürmann

Reviewer: Please add yourself to the `AUTHORS_METADATA` dict in the `pelicanconf.py`: https://github.com/mixxxdj/website/blob/website/pelicanconf.py#L158

Then run `tools/update_avatars.py`. It will automatically fetch your profile picture from github and add it to the source tree (don't forget to `git add` it).

Something like:

```python
AUTHOR_METADATA = {
    # ...
    "daschuer": {
        "name": "Daniel Schürmann", 
        "github": "daschuer",
        "discourse": "daschuer", 
        "tagline": "Mixxx Core Developer", 
    },
}
```

The author information including the avatar will be displayed below the post.

> tags: 2.3, jack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: 2.3, jack, alsa, sound
```

date: 2021.03.18 02:42:18

> In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the JACK layer introduces. The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:

Reviewer: Let's give some more context to readers that aren't experts in the field. E. g.:
```suggestion
In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the JACK Audio Connection Kit introduces. That is one of the [Sound APIs](https://manual.mixxx.org/2.3/en/chapters/preferences.html#sound-api) that Mixxx supports on Linux and it's a layer on top of the Advances Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA). The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:
```

> In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the JACK Audio Connection Kit introduces. That is one of the [Sound APIs](https://manual.mixxx.org/2.3/en/chapters/preferences.html#sound-api) that Mixxx supports on Linux and it's a layer on top of the Advances Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA). The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:

Reviewer: Fixing my own typo, sorry

```suggestion
In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the JACK Audio Connection Kit introduces. That is one of the [Sound APIs](https://manual.mixxx.org/2.3/en/chapters/preferences.html#sound-api) that Mixxx supports on Linux and it's a layer on top of the Advanced Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA). The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:
```

This can be confirmed by recording the own sound via a mic and measure the round trip latency:

![Screenshot of audacity showing the round trip latency]({static}/images/news/roundtriplatency.png)

The upper stream is the JACK case. The left channel is the recorded master 440 Hz sine wave and the right channel is the mic input.

JACK is configured with a 1024 frames buffer and reports a latency of 46.4 ms for the sum of two buffers .
The roundtrip latency is 95 ms ~4 buffers = Driver + ALSA + 2 x Mixxx

The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23.2 ms
The roundtrip latency is 49 ms ~2 buffers = Driver + ALSA

Not in the picture is the ALSA pulse device. It runs at a latency of 104 ms ~5 buffers. Driver + ALSA + 2 x Pulse + ALSA

With this picture we can verify that Mixxx actually has the same buffer size in both cases. When pressing pause. It fades this signal out over one buffer length these is equal in both cases.
The peaks in the recorded right channel is the sound of the mouse click. You can only barely see the recorded sine wave.

> ![Screenshot of audacity showing the fade out]({static}/images/news/fadeoutcompare.png)

Reviewer: 2 minor nits:

- You could run audacity on the command line with LANG=C to make the user interface english
- I think audacity has a dark mode that you can use to make the screenshots fit better into the general theme of our website.

The roundtrip latency is 95 ms ~4 buffers = Driver + ALSA + 2 x Mixxx

The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23,2 ms
The roundtrip latency is 49 ms ~2 buffers = Driver + ALSA

Not in the picture is the ALSA pulse device. It runs at a latency of 104 ms ~5 buffers. Driver + ALSA + 2 x Pulse + ALSA

With this picture we can verify that Mixxx actually has the same buffer size in both cases. When pressing pause. It fades this signal out over one buffer length these is equal in both cases. 
The peaks in the recorded right channel is the sound of the mouse click. You can only barely see the recorded sine wave.

![Screenshot of audacity showing the fade out]({static}/images/news/fadeoutcompare.png)

Another disadvantage of Jack is that it can't deal (well) with two or more sound cards. Mixxx can do this using the ALSA API and this with also no extra latency as long the underlying driver allows it.

## Conclusion 

Don't use Jack when you don't need it for another reason.  The same will be true for Pipewire using the same architecture. 

## What comes next? 

> There is a chance to get rid of the extra latency in these cases, and make Mixxx use the buffer provided by Jack/Pipewire. This requires that Mixxx becomes a native Jack or Pipewire application.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why PortAudio can't do this.

Author: PortAudio Is only software, so it can be refactored to do this. And than Mixxx also need to be refactored to work with the new PortAudio API.

Reviewer 2: Why would this need a new PortAudio API? If PortAudio doesn't add any extra latency with ALSA then it is IMO a major bug if it does with JACK.

Reviewer 2: Have you reported this bug upstream to PortAudio?

Author: This is not a bug. It is an intended implementation detail. I had a discussion on the Portaudio Mailing list 5 years ago or such.

Reviewer 2: I cannot find the discussion in the PortAudio mailing list archive. If PortAudio does not add any latency with ALSA it should be possible to do the same with JACK.

Reviewer 2: If this bug is not fixable without a major refactoring, it may be better to write a new PipeWire backend for PortAudio.

Author: Yes, of cause, but that is not that easy, because Portaudio has an abstraction of sound cards. While Jack has just ports.
Portaudio gaps through Jack to get back the soundcard. This is nice to have a common interface for all APIs but comes at a cost of latency.

Reviewer 2: or maybe it would be better to switch to cpal after all...

Reviewer 2: I don't understand how PortAudio's abstractions require adding latency. If they don't for ALSA, they should not for JACK.

The round trip latency is 95 ms ~4 buffers = Driver + ALSA + 2 x Mixxx (PortAudio)

The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23.2 ms
The round trip latency is 49 ms ~2 buffers = Driver + ALSA

Not in the picture is the ALSA pulse device. It runs at a latency of 104 ms ~5 buffers. Driver + ALSA + 2 x Pulse + ALSA

With this picture we can verify that Mixxx actually has the same buffer size in both cases. When pressing pause, it fades the signal out over one buffer length which is equal in both cases.
The peaks in the recorded right channel is the sound of the mouse click. You can only barely see the recorded sine wave.

![Screenshot of audacity showing the fade out]({static}/images/news/fadeoutcompare.png)

For reference, I have done the same test using [jack_iodelay](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/bionic/man1/jack_iodelay.1.html)

```
  3114.842 frames     70.631 ms total roundtrip latency
	extra loopback latency: 42 frames
	use 21 for the backend arguments -I and -O Inv
```

The result is 70 ms ~3 buffers = Driver + ALSA + jack_iodelay. This is one buffer more than a native ALSA implementation.

## Conclusion

> For now, we recommend using Mixxx with the ALSA backends even if you are running JACK. The same applies to [PipeWire](https://pipewire.org) as Mixxx uses JACK protocol to connect to it."

Reviewer 3: You copied over the quote.

Author: Ups, I have forced push.

> title: "Has JACK zero latency?"

Reviewer: The JACK developers might misinterpret this as unfair criticism of JACK in general. What about something like:

```suggestion
title: "Does using Mixxx with JACK give you zero latency?"
```
Or something like that?

authors: Daniel Schürmann

> tags: 2.3, jack, alsa, sound, latency, pipewire

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: jack, alsa, sound, latency, pipewire
```
This is not 2.3-specific, right?

Author: Ah, yes.

> date: 2021.03.18 02:42:18

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: draft
```
Our CI will update the date according to the date of the merge commit.

In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the [JACK Audio Connection Kit](https://jackaudio.org) introduces when used in Mixxx. That is one of the [Sound APIs](https://manual.mixxx.org/2.3/en/chapters/preferences.html#sound-api) that Mixxx supports on Linux, and it's a layer on top of the [Advances Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA)](https://www.alsa-project.org). The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:
> There is **NO** extra latency caused by using JACK for audio input and output. When we say none, we mean absolutely zero.

> This is true on its own, because JACK uses directly the buffer configured for ALSA to mix the audio sources together. ALSA has a second buffer with the same length that is used to feed these samples into the hardware. That's all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is true on its own, because JACK uses the buffer configured for ALSA directly to mix the audio sources together. ALSA has a second buffer with the same length that is used to feed these samples into the hardware. That's all.
```

> However, in the case of Mixxx two more buffers are used by JACK, for syncing and to mixing the buffers of the patch field. It allows the clienet applications to use the full CPU time of each buffer cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in the case of Mixxx two more buffers are used by JACK for syncing and mixing the buffers of the patch field. It allows the client applications to use the full CPU time of each buffer cycle.

This is not a problem of JACK per se, but of the way JACK support was implemented in Mixxx. 
```

> When using the ALSA API directly Mixxx does what JACK does. It uses the ALSA buffer directly, which doesn't add any latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the ALSA API directly Mixxx does what JACK does: It uses the ALSA buffer directly, which doesn't add any latency. 
```

> This can be confirmed by recording the own sound via a mic and measure the round trip latency. For my test, I have used the internal speaker, microphone and ALC298 Analog sound. For separating the signals in one stereo stream, I have enabled the Balance effect for deck 1 fully right and for mic fully left. The test track is a 440 Hz sine wave generated by [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org). Then I have cued the track into the pre-roll start recording and press play.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be confirmed by recording the own sound via a mic and measure the round trip latency. For my test, I have used the internal speaker, microphone and ALC298 Analog sound. For separating the signals in one stereo stream, I have enabled the Balance effect to move deck 1 fully to the right channel and the mic fully to the left. The test track is a 440 Hz sine wave generated by [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org). Then I have cued the track into the pre-roll start recording and press play.
```

Here the resulting recordings visualized in [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org):

![Screenshot of audacity showing the round trip latency]({static}/images/news/roundtriplatency.png)

The upper stream is the JACK case. The left channel is the recorded master 440 Hz sine wave and the right channel is the mic input.

JACK is configured with a 1024 frames buffer and reports a latency of 46.4 ms for the sum of two buffers.

> The round trip latency is 95 ms ~4 buffers = Driver + ALSA + JACK Async mode + duplex stream

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The round trip latency is 95 ms (driver + ALSA + JACK async mode + duplex stream = 4 buffers). 
```

The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23.2 ms

> The round trip latency is 49 ms ~2 buffers = Driver + ALSA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The round trip latency is 49 ms (driver + ALSA = 2 buffers). 
```

> Not in the picture is the ALSA pulse device. It runs at a latency of 104 ms ~5 buffers. Driver + ALSA + 2 x Pulse + ALSA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not in the picture is the ALSA pulse device. It runs at a latency of 104 ms (driver + ALSA + 2 x pulse + ALSA = 5 buffers) 
```

PipeWire on Fedora 34 has by default the same latency as JACK in this test.

With this picture we can verify that Mixxx actually has the same buffer size in both cases. When pressing pause, it fades the signal out over one buffer length which is equal in both cases.
The peaks in the recorded right channel is the sound of the mouse click. You can only barely see the recorded sine wave.

![Screenshot of audacity showing the fade out]({static}/images/news/fadeoutcompare.png)

> For reference, I have done the same test using [jack_iodelay](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/bionic/man1/jack_iodelay.1.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For reference, I have done the same test using [`jack_iodelay`](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/bionic/man1/jack_iodelay.1.html)
```

```
  3114.842 frames     70.631 ms total roundtrip latency
	extra loopback latency: 42 frames
	use 21 for the backend arguments -I and -O Inv

> ```

Reviewer: Indent by 4 spaces instead of using fenced code blocks here. It improves readability in a text editor IMHO.

> The result is 70 ms ~3 buffers = Driver + ALSA + JACK Async mode. The duplex cycle is omitted here. This is one buffer more than a native ALSA implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result is 70 ms (driver + ALSA + JACK async mode = 3 buffers). The duplex cycle is omitted here. This is one buffer more than a native ALSA implementation.
```

> To verify that the duplex cycle is not introduced in the Mixxx or [PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com) abstraction layer used by Mixxx. I have routed the jack_iodelay signal trough Mixxx.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify that the duplex cycle is not introduced by Mixxx or the [PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com) abstraction layer used by Mixxx, I have routed the `jack_iodelay` signal through Mixxx.
```

![Jack patch field showing the jack_iodelay Mixxx loop]({static}/images/news/jackpatch.png)

```
  2048.000 frames     46.440 ms total roundtrip latency
	extra loopback latency: 2047 frames
	use 1023 for the backend arguments -I and -O
```

> This is the minimum we can expect, one buffer is needed for jack_iodelay and one for Mixxx. The result can be confirmed with the same setup using jack_latent_client which just passes the input to the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the minimum we can expect, one buffer is needed for `jack_iodelay` and one for Mixxx. The result can be confirmed with the same setup using `jack_latent_client` which just passes the input to the output.
```

> If we connect the output of Mixxx to the input, an extra buffer is used for some reasons. This can be also confirmed with jack_latent_client and the same feedback loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we connect the output of Mixxx to the input, an extra buffer is used for some reason. This can be also confirmed with `jack_latent_client` and the same feedback loop.
```

![Jack feedback loop]({static}/images/news/feedbackloop.png)

> The upper stream shows the Mixxx results and the lower stream shows the jack_latent_client results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The upper stream shows the Mixxx results and the lower stream shows the `jack_latent_client` results.
```

> In addition, most distros use JACK with it's default "Server Asynchronous Mode" which introduce one buffer extra latency (--async-latenc) when accessing the sound card. From Ubuntu Hirsute 21.4, QJackCtl exposes a "Use server synchronous mode" checkbox in the sound card preferences. It is grayed out by default but becomes active if "Enable JACK D-Bus interface" is checked as well. In this case the JACK mixing is done after Mixxx in the same time interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, most distros use JACK with it's default "Server Asynchronous Mode" which introduce one buffer extra latency (`--async-latency`) when accessing the sound card. From Ubuntu Hirsute 21.4, QJackCtl exposes a "Use server synchronous mode" checkbox in the sound card preferences. It is grayed out by default but becomes active if "Enable JACK D-Bus interface" is checked as well. In this case the JACK mixing is done after Mixxx in the same time interval.
```

## Conclusion

For now, we recommend using Mixxx with the ALSA backends even if you are running JACK. The same applies to [PipeWire](https://pipewire.org) as Mixxx uses JACK protocol to connect to it.

It should be also noted that JACK can't deal (well) with two or more sound cards. Mixxx can do this using the ALSA API and this with no extra latency as long the underlying driver allows it.

> Pipewire will become default on most diestros and we need to find out what is the best setup for using it with Mixxx. Do you have interest to help? Get in contact with us at [Zulip](https://mixxx.zulipchat.com)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pipewire will become default on most distros and we need to find out what is the best setup for using it with Mixxx. Do you have interest to help? Get in contact with us at [Zulip](https://mixxx.zulipchat.com)
```

title: "Does using Mixxx with JACK give you zero latency?"
authors: Daniel Schürmann
tags: jack, alsa, sound, latency, pipewire
status: draft

In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the [JACK Audio Connection Kit](https://jackaudio.org) introduces when used in Mixxx. That is one of the [Sound APIs](https://manual.mixxx.org/2.3/en/chapters/preferences.html#sound-api) that Mixxx supports on Linux, and it's a layer on top of the [Advances Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA)](https://www.alsa-project.org).

> Unlike analog devices, digital audio devices process audio in time slices of samples stored in memory buffers. These are passed through the various layers. It takes at least the time of one of such buffers, but can be longer depending on the nature of these layers. The resulting time is the latency of a digital audio device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike analog devices, digital audio devices process audio in time slices of samples stored in memory buffers. These are passed through the various layers. The latency of a digital audio device depends on the number and size of those buffers.
The aim is to minimize the latency, so that pressing a button or turning a knob in Mixxx works without noticable delay, which would make DJing by ear impossible.
```

    2048.000 frames     46.440 ms total roundtrip latency
    extra loopback latency: 2047 frames
    use 1023 for the backend arguments -I and -O

This is the minimum we can expect, one buffer is needed for `jack_iodelay` and one for Mixxx. The result can be confirmed with the same setup using `jack_latent_client` which just passes the input to the output.

If we connect the output of Mixxx to the input, an extra buffer is used for some reason. This can be also confirmed with `jack_latent_client` and the same feedback loop.

![Jack feedback loop]({static}/images/news/feedbackloop.png)

The upper stream shows the Mixxx results and the lower stream shows the `jack_latent_client` results.

In addition, most distros use JACK with it's default "Server Asynchronous Mode" which introduce one buffer extra latency (`--async-latency`) when accessing the sound card. From Ubuntu Hirsute 21.4, QJackCtl exposes a "Use server synchronous mode" checkbox in the sound card preferences. It is grayed out by default but becomes active if "Enable JACK D-Bus interface" is checked as well. In this case the JACK mixing is done after Mixxx in the same time interval.

## Conclusion

> For now, we recommend using Mixxx with the ALSA backends even if you are running JACK. The same applies to [PipeWire](https://pipewire.org) as Mixxx uses JACK protocol to connect to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For now, we recommend using Mixxx with the ALSA backends even if you are running JACK. The same applies to [PipeWire](https://pipewire.org) as Mixxx uses JACK protocol to connect to it.
If you do want to use JACK, make sure to enable synchronous mode for better latency.
```

Author: I would not explicit recommend it, because I think it is not default for some reasons. It is obvious that Jack needs some time to compose the final buffer and I assume that this time is removed from the time Mixxx can use. 

It might be the case that you can use in Async mode a smaller buffer, resulting to the same over all latency with a bigger buffer in sync mode, but more predictable. 

At least we need to collect some experience before recommending it.

> It should be also noted that JACK can't deal (well) with two or more sound cards. Mixxx can do this using the ALSA API and this with no extra latency as long the underlying driver allows it.

Reviewer: Is this actually a problem of JACK, or is it just a downside of our portaudio-based JACK implementation? If the latter, we should make that clear.

Author: This is an issue of Jack, which is missing a clock sync routine. Mixxx is not able to apply it's own clock sync code in this case. I have tested that when implement the Mixxx syncing.

Author: This this is only partially related, should we remove the sentence?

Author: I have added links for reference.

title: "Does using Mixxx with JACK give you zero latency?"
authors: Daniel Schürmann
tags: jack, alsa, sound, latency, pipewire
status: draft

In regular intervals, we discuss how much latency the [JACK Audio Connection Kit](https://jackaudio.org) introduces when used in Mixxx. That is one of the [Sound APIs](https://manual.mixxx.org/2.3/en/chapters/preferences.html#sound-api) that Mixxx supports on Linux, and it's a layer on top of the [Advances Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA)](https://www.alsa-project.org).

Unlike analog devices, digital audio devices process audio in time slices of samples stored in memory buffers. These are passed through the various layers. The latency of a digital audio device depends on the number and size of those buffers.

> The aim is to minimize the latency, so that pressing a button or turning a knob in Mixxx works without noticeable delay, which would make DJing by ear impossible.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The aim is to minimize the latency, so that the audible result of pressing a button or turning a knob in Mixxx is produced without noticeable delay, in order to allow DJing by ear.
```

The [JACK FAQ](https://jackaudio.org/faq/no_extra_latency.html) state that:
> There is **NO** extra latency caused by using JACK for audio input and output. When we say none, we mean absolutely zero.

This is true on its own, because JACK uses the buffer configured for ALSA directly to mix the audio sources together. ALSA has a second buffer with the same length that is used to feed these samples into the hardware. That's all.

However, in the case of Mixxx two more buffers are used by JACK for syncing and mixing the buffers of the patch field. It allows the client applications to use the full CPU time of each buffer cycle.

This is not a problem of JACK per se, but of the way JACK support was implemented in Mixxx.

When using the ALSA API directly Mixxx does what JACK does: It uses the ALSA buffer directly, which doesn't add any latency.

> This can be confirmed by recording the own sound via a mic and measure the round trip latency. For my test, I have used the internal speaker, microphone and ALC298 Analog sound. For separating the signals in one stereo stream, I have enabled the Balance effect to move deck 1 fully to the right channel and the mic fully to the left. The test track is a 440 Hz sine wave generated by [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org). Then I have cued the track into the pre-roll start recording and press play.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This can be confirmed by recording the own sound via a mic and measure the round trip latency. For my test, I have used the internal speaker, microphone and ALC298 Analog sound. For separating the signals in one stereo stream, I have enabled the Balance effect to move deck 1 fully to the right channel and the mic fully to the left. The test track is a 440 Hz sine wave generated by [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org). Then I have cued the track into the pre-roll, started recording and pressed play.
```

> Here the resulting recordings visualized in [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These are the resulting recordings visualized in [Audacity](https://www.audacityteam.org):
```

![Screenshot of audacity showing the round trip latency]({static}/images/news/roundtriplatency.png)

The upper stream is the JACK case. The left channel is the recorded master 440 Hz sine wave and the right channel is the mic input.

JACK is configured with a 1024 frames buffer and reports a latency of 46.4 ms for the sum of two buffers.
The round trip latency is 95 ms (driver + ALSA + JACK async mode + duplex stream = 4 buffers).

> The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configures with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23.2 ms

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The lower stream is the ALSA case. Mixxx is configured with the same single buffer of 1024 frames = 23.2 ms.
```

    use 21 for the backend arguments -I and -O

The result is 70 ms (driver + ALSA + JACK async mode = 3 buffers). The duplex cycle is omitted here. This is one buffer more than a native ALSA implementation.

To verify that the duplex cycle is not introduced by Mixxx or the [PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com) abstraction layer used by Mixxx, I have routed the `jack_iodelay` signal through Mixxx.

![Jack patch field showing the jack_iodelay Mixxx loop]({static}/images/news/jackpatch.png)

    2048.000 frames     46.440 ms total roundtrip latency
    extra loopback latency: 2047 frames
    use 1023 for the backend arguments -I and -O

This is the minimum we can expect, one buffer is needed for `jack_iodelay` and one for Mixxx. The result can be confirmed with the same setup using `jack_latent_client` which just passes the input to the output.

If we connect the output of Mixxx to the input, an extra buffer is used for some reason. This can be also confirmed with `jack_latent_client` and the same feedback loop.

![Jack feedback loop]({static}/images/news/feedbackloop.png)

The upper stream shows the Mixxx results and the lower stream shows the `jack_latent_client` results.

> In addition, most distros use JACK with it's default "Server Asynchronous Mode" which introduce one buffer extra latency (`--async-latency`) when accessing the sound card. From Ubuntu Hirsute 21.4, QJackCtl exposes a "Use server synchronous mode" checkbox in the sound card preferences. It is grayed out by default but becomes active if "Enable JACK D-Bus interface" is checked as well. In this case the JACK mixing is done after Mixxx in the same time interval.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In addition, most distros use JACK with its default "Server Asynchronous Mode" which introduce one buffer of extra latency (`--async-latency`) when accessing the sound card. In Ubuntu Hirsute 21.4, QJackCtl exposes a "Use server synchronous mode" checkbox in the sound card preferences. It is grayed out by default but becomes active if "Enable JACK D-Bus interface" is checked as well. In this case the JACK mixing is done after Mixxx in the same time interval.
```
